Automatic summarization is the process of reducing a text document with a computer program in order to create a summary that retains the most important points of the original document. Technologies that can make a coherent summary take into account variables such as length, writing style and syntax. Automatic data summarization is part of machine learning and data mining. The main idea of summarization is to find a representative subset of the data, which contains the information of the entire set. Summarization technologies are used in a large number of sectors in industry today. An example of the use of summarization technology is search engines such as Google. Other examples include document summarization, image collection summarization and video summarization. Document summarization, tries to automatically create a representative summary or abstract of the entire document, by finding the most informative sentences. Similarly, in image summarization the system finds the most representative and important (or salient) images. Similarly, in consumer videos one would want to remove the boring or repetitive scenes, and extract out a much shorter and concise version of the video. This is also important, say for surveillance videos, where one might want to extract only important events in the recorded video, since most part of the video may be uninteresting with nothing going on. As the problem of information overload grows, and as the amount of data increases, the interest in automatic summarization is also increasing. Generally, there are two approaches to automatic summarization: extraction and abstraction. Extractive methods work by selecting a subset of existing words, phrases, or sentences in the original text to form the summary. In contrast, abstractive methods build an internal semantic representation and then use natural language generation techniques to create a summary that is closer to what a human might generate. Such a summary might contain words not explicitly present in the original. Research into abstractive methods is an increasingly important and active research area, however due to complexity constraints, research to date has focused primarily on extractive methods. In some application domains, extractive summarization makes more sense. Examples of these include image collection summarization and video summarization. There are broadly two types of extractive summarization tasks depending on what the summarization program focuses on. The first is generic summarization, which focuses on obtaining a generic summary or abstract of the collection (whether documents, or sets of images, or videos, news stories etc.). The second is query relevant summarization, sometimes called query-based summarization, which summarizes objects specific to a query. Summarization systems are able to create both query relevant text summaries and generic machine-generated summaries depending on what the user needs. An example of a summarization problem is document summarization, which attempts to automatically produce an abstract from a given document. Sometimes one might be interested in generating a summary from a single source document, while others can use multiple source documents (for example, a cluster of articles on the same topic). This problem is called multi-document summarization. A related application is summarizing news articles. Imagine a system, which automatically pulls together news articles on a given topic (from the web), and concisely represents the latest news as a summary. Image collection summarization is another application example of automatic summarization. It consists in selecting a representative set of images from a larger set of images.[1] A summary in this context is useful to show the most representative images of results in an image collection exploration system. Video summarization is a related domain, where the system automatically creates a trailer of a long video. This also has applications in consumer or personal videos, where one might want to skip the boring or repetitive actions. Similarly, in surveillance videos, one would want to extract important and suspicious activity, while ignoring all the boring and redundant frames captured. At a very high level, summarization algorithms try to find subsets of objects (like set of sentences, or a set of images), which cover information of the entire set. This is also called the core-set. These algorithms model notions like diversity, coverage, information and representativeness of the summary. Query based summarization techniques, additionally model for relevance of the summary with the query. Some techniques and algorithms which naturally model summarization problems are TextRank and PageRank, Submodular set function, Determinantal point process, maximal marginal relevance (MMR) etc.